We talked about how we can linearly interpolate
position.
What do we do for the case of rotations?
We could naively rewrite our expression like
this where we have the initial rotation, the
final rotation and the intermediate rotation.
But, there’s a problem with this scheme.
A rotation matrix is not just any old 3 x 3
matrix.
It’s a special matrix.
It’s an orthogonal matrix and that means
that each column in the matrix is a unit vector.
So if I add two orthogonal matrices, the result
will never be an orthogonal matrix because
if I can see that each column, the sum of
two unit vectors, can never ever be a unit
vector.
So this is not a strategy we can use to interpolate
rotations.
We need to consider other ways of representing
rotation that we can interpolate.
So, one way to achieve this is to recall that
this interpolation formula works for vectors
and we can represent a rotation in terms of
a vector of angles.
It can be three Euler angles or it could be
three roll, pitch, yaw angles.
So if we consider this vector of angles as
the symbol Gamma, then we can introduce the
initial angles, the final angles, and then
we can interpolate the intermediate angles.
If our initial and final orientations are
given in terms of rotation matrices, then
we convert those two into initial set of angles
and a final set of angles.
We interpolate the intermediate angles and
we can convert those back to a rotation matrix
if we so desire.
We’re going to use the function jtraj that
we looked at a moment ago to interpolate roll,
pitch, yaw angles.
I’m going to put the result into the workspace
variable X. Invoke the jtraj function.
I’m going to interpolate between a set of
roll, pitch, yaw angles and roll equal to
0 and the final set of roll, pitch, yaw angles
which are equal to minus pi on 2, plus pi
on 2 and pi on 4.
And, I’m going to do this interpolation
over a hundred time steps.
The result is a new variable in our workspace
that’s got 100 rows, each row corresponds
to a time step.
And, it has got three columns and the columns
correspond to the roll, pitch and yaw angles.
I can plot this roll, pitch, yaw angles versus
time.
Here we can see what they look like, moving
smoothly from the initial value to the final
value.
Now, we want to convert the roll, pitch, yaw
angle in each row of the matrix X in to a
rotation matrix.
And to do that, I’m going to use the rpy2r
function that we looked at previously and
I’m going to pass in X.
And what the function will do in this case
is it will convert every row of this matrix
into a rotation matrix.
The result is a rotation matrix, but the matrix
has got dimensions of 3 x 3 x 100.
So we can think of it as a stack of rotation
matrices.
So we could look at the first one in that
stack and it’s a rotation matrix.
It looks like this.
It’s null rotation.
It’s a unit matrix.
I could look at the 10th one in the stack
and it looks something like this.
So R is a sequence of rotation matrices.
Now I can pass a sequence of rotation matrices
like that to the function tranimate.
What we will see is an animation showing the
orientation of the coordinate frame changing
smoothly from the initial orientation specified
in terms of roll, pitch, yaw angles to a final
orientation also specified in terms of roll,
pitch, yaw angles.
Euler angles and roll, pitch, yaw angles are
represented as a vector of three angles.
Each element of these vectors we can consider
as a point on a circle and the path from the
initial angle to the final angle is an arc
on the unit circle.
Consider now the case where we have this initial
angle and this final angle.
And a naive interpolation would move us from
the initial angle to the final angle the long
way around the circle.
What we need to remember with angles is that
there are always two ways to get from A to
B.
There is potentially the long way and there
is potentially the short way.
So when we are interpolating each element
in our angle sequence vector, it’s important
that we choose the shortest path.
If we look at the angle as a function of time,
the long path is given here in blue.
We see we’re moving from 2 radians to -2
radians.
Whereas the short path which is shown in red
moves through an angle of pi radians, pops
back at minus pi radians and then moves quickly
to the destination point B of a value of -2
radians.
Earlier, we introduce quaternions and this
is the equation we used to interpolate between
two quaternions.
Once again, it’s a function of S and S varies
from 0 to 1.
And the important element in this equation
is Theta and Theta is derived from the elements
of the initial and final quaternion.
This is referred to as spherical linear interpolation
and it is the shortest and most direct path
between any two orientations.
And it corresponds to a constant angular velocity
about a fixed axis in space.
Let’s create a pair of quaternions that
we will interpolate between.
The first one corresponds to a null rotation.
We see that it’s got a vector component
of 0.
The second quaternion is a representation
of a rotation about the x-axis by pi on 2.
So, we’re going to pass in a rotation matrix.
The quaternion class is going to turn that
into a quaternion.
Now, there are two quaternions in our workspace,
one corresponding to no rotation, one corresponding
to rotation of 90 degrees about the x-axis.
To interpolate quaternions, we use the interp
method.
We apply that to the initial quaternion.
And, the first argument is the final quaternion
and the second argument is the position along
a trajectory.
So 0 is the first point on the trajectory.
That’s the initial condition, the initial
quaternion which is the null rotation.
I can repeat that and ask for the final point
in the interpolation and that is equal to
the second quaternion.
I can ask now for a point that’s midway
between 0.5 and this is the interpolated quaternion.
And of course, I can turn that back in to
a rotation matrix using the R method.
Now, we might like to compare the effect of
the different types of rotational interpolation
and that’s a little bit difficult.
It’s hard to visualize a particular rotation.
But, one way we can do it is to consider the
effect of a rotation on a particular vector.
So here, I have chosen the x-axis which I
can represent by a vector 1, 0, 0.
And I can apply these three different rotation
sequences to that vector.
I can interpolate the initial and final Euler
angles, the initial and final roll, pitch,
yaw angles or the initial and final quaternions
and they are shown by the different colored
parts plotted here on the sphere.
The quaternion path shown in white is the
shortest and most direct path.
We can see that the roll, pitch, yaw interpolation
path has deviated significantly from it.
It has taken a more indirect and longer path
to get from the initial orientation to the
final orientation.
Quaternion interpolation is the gold standard.